Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Chapter 15: File System
Internals. Windows 10

-- 1 of 49 --

21.2 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Chapter 15: File System Internals
 File Systems
 File-System Mounting
 Partitions and Mounting
 File Sharing
 Design Principles Windows
 System Components Windows
 Memory Management Windows

-- 2 of 49 --

21.3 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Partitions and Mounting
 Partition can be a volume containing a file system (“cooked”) or
raw – just a sequence of blocks with no file system
 Boot block can point to boot volume or boot loader set of blocks that
contain enough code to know how to load the kernel from the file
system
 Or a boot management program for multi-os booting
 Root partition contains the OS, other partitions can hold other
Oses, other file systems, or be raw
 Mounted at boot time
 Other partitions can mount automatically or manually
 At mount time, file system consistency checked
 Is all metadata correct?
 If not, fix it, try again
 If yes, add to mount table, allow access

-- 3 of 49 --

21.4 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Virtual File Systems
 Virtual File Systems (VFS) on Unix provide an object-oriented
way of implementing file systems
 VFS allows the same system call interface (the API) to be used
for different types of file systems
 Separates file-system generic operations from
implementation details
 Implementation can be one of many file systems types, or
network file system
 Implements vnodes which hold inodes or network file
details
 Then dispatches operation to appropriate file system
implementation routines

-- 4 of 49 --

21.5 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Virtual File Systems (Cont.)
 The API is to the VFS interface, rather than any specific type of
file system

-- 5 of 49 --

21.6 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Virtual File System Implementation
 For example, Linux has four object types:
 inode, file, superblock, dentry
 VFS defines set of operations on the objects that must be
implemented
 Every object has a pointer to a function table
 Function table has addresses of routines to implement that
function on that object
 For example:
 • int open(. . .)—Open a file
 • int close(. . .)—Close an already-open file
 • ssize t read(. . .)—Read from a file
 • ssize t write(. . .)—Write to a file
 • int mmap(. . .)—Memory-map a file

-- 6 of 49 --

21.7 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
The Sun Network File System (NFS)
 An implementation and a specification of a software system
for accessing remote files across LANs (or WANs)
 The implementation is part of the Solaris and SunOS
operating systems running on Sun workstations using an
unreliable datagram protocol (UDP/IP protocol and Ethernet

-- 7 of 49 --

21.8 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
NFS (Cont.)
 Interconnected workstations viewed as a set of independent machines
with independent file systems, which allows sharing among these file
systems in a transparent manner
 A remote directory is mounted over a local file system directory
 The mounted directory looks like an integral subtree of the local
file system, replacing the subtree descending from the local
directory
 Specification of the remote directory for the mount operation is
nontransparent; the host name of the remote directory has to be
provided
 Files in the remote directory can then be accessed in a
transparent manner
 Subject to access-rights accreditation, potentially any file system
(or directory within a file system), can be mounted remotely on top
of any local directory

-- 8 of 49 --

21.9 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
NFS (Cont.)
 NFS is designed to operate in a heterogeneous environment of
different machines, operating systems, and network architectures;
the NFS specifications independent of these media
 This independence is achieved through the use of RPC primitives
built on top of an External Data Representation (XDR) protocol
used between two implementation-independent interfaces
 The NFS specification distinguishes between the services provided
by a mount mechanism and the actual remote-file-access services

-- 9 of 49 --

21.10 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Three Independent File Systems

-- 10 of 49 --

21.11 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Mounting in NFS
Mounts Cascading mounts

-- 11 of 49 --

21.12 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
NFS Mount Protocol
 Establishes initial logical connection between server and client
 Mount operation includes name of remote directory to be mounted
and name of server machine storing it
 Mount request is mapped to corresponding RPC and forwarded
to mount server running on server machine
 Export list – specifies local file systems that server exports for
mounting, along with names of machines that are permitted to
mount them
 Following a mount request that conforms to its export list, the
server returns a file handle—a key for further accesses
 File handle – a file-system identifier, and an inode number to
identify the mounted directory within the exported file system
 The mount operation changes only the user’s view and does not
affect the server side

-- 12 of 49 --

21.13 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
NFS Protocol
 Provides a set of remote procedure calls for remote file operations.
The procedures support the following operations:
 searching for a file within a directory
 reading a set of directory entries
 manipulating links and directories
 accessing file attributes
 reading and writing files
 NFS servers are stateless; each request has to provide a full set
of arguments (NFS V4 is just coming available – very different,
stateful)
 Modified data must be committed to the server’s disk before
results are returned to the client (lose advantages of caching)
 The NFS protocol does not provide concurrency-control
mechanisms

-- 13 of 49 --

21.14 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Three Major Layers of NFS Architecture
 UNIX file-system interface (based on the open, read, write, and
close calls, and file descriptors)
 Virtual File System (VFS) layer – distinguishes local files from
remote ones, and local files are further distinguished according to
their file-system types
 The VFS activates file-system-specific operations to handle
local requests according to their file-system types
 Calls the NFS protocol procedures for remote requests
 NFS service layer – bottom layer of the architecture
 Implements the NFS protocol

-- 14 of 49 --

21.15 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Schematic View of NFS Architecture

-- 15 of 49 --

21.16 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
NFS Path-Name Translation
 Performed by breaking the path into component names and
performing a separate NFS lookup call for every pair of
component name and directory vnode
 To make lookup faster, a directory name lookup cache on the
client’s side holds the vnodes for remote directory names

-- 16 of 49 --

21.17 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
NFS Remote Operations
 Nearly one-to-one correspondence between regular UNIX system
calls and the NFS protocol RPCs (except opening and closing
files)
 NFS adheres to the remote-service paradigm, but employs
buffering and caching techniques for the sake of performance
 File-blocks cache – when a file is opened, the kernel checks with
the remote server whether to fetch or revalidate the cached
attributes
 Cached file blocks are used only if the corresponding cached
attributes are up to date
 File-attribute cache – the attribute cache is updated whenever new
attributes arrive from the server
 Clients do not free delayed-write blocks until the server confirms
that the data have been written to disk

-- 17 of 49 --

21.18 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Windows 10
 32-bit preemptive multitasking operating system for Intel microprocessors
 Key goals for the system:
 portability
 security
 POSIX compliance
 multiprocessor support
 extensibility
 international support
 compatibility with MS-DOS and MS-Windows applications.
 Uses a micro-kernel architecture
 Available in six client versions, Starter, Home Basic, Home Premium,
Professional, Enterprise and Ultimate. With the exception of Starter edition
(32-bit only) all are available in both 32-bit and 64-bit.
 Available in three server versions (all 64-bit only), Standard, Enterprise and
Datacenter

-- 18 of 49 --

21.19 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Design Principles
 Extensibility — layered architecture
 Executive, which runs in protected mode, provides the basic
system services
 On top of the executive, several server subsystems operate in
user mode
 Modular structure allows additional environmental subsystems to
be added without affecting the executive
 Portability — Windows 10 can be moved from one hardware
architecture to another with relatively few changes
 Written in C and C++
 Processor-specific portions are written in assembly language for a
given processor architecture (small amount of such code).
 Platform-dependent code is isolated in a dynamic link library
(DLL) called the “hardware abstraction layer” (HAL)

-- 19 of 49 --

21.20 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Design Principles (Cont.)
 Reliability — Windows 10 uses hardware protection for virtual
memory, and software protection mechanisms for operating
system resources
 Compatibility — applications that follow the IEEE 1003.1 (POSIX)
standard can be complied to run on 10 without changing the
source code
 Performance — Windows 10 subsystems can communicate with
one another via high-performance message passing
 Preemption of low priority threads enables the system to
respond quickly to external events
 Designed for symmetrical multiprocessing
 International support — supports different locales via the national
language support (NLS) API

-- 20 of 49 --

21.21 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Windows 10 Architecture
 Layered system of module
 Protected mode — hardware abstraction layer (HAL),
kernel, executive
 User mode — collection of subsystems
 Environmental subsystems emulate different operating
systems
 Protection subsystems provide security functions

-- 21 of 49 --

21.22 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Depiction of 10 Architecture

-- 22 of 49 --

21.23 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
 Foundation for the executive and the subsystems
 Never paged out of memory; execution is never preempted
 Four main responsibilities:
 thread scheduling
 interrupt and exception handling
 low-level processor synchronization
 recovery after a power failure
 Kernel is object-oriented, uses two sets of objects
 dispatcher objects control dispatching and synchronization
(events, mutants, mutexes, semaphores, threads and
timers)
 control objects (asynchronous procedure calls, interrupts,
power notify, power status, process and profile objects)
System Components — Kernel

-- 23 of 49 --

21.24 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Kernel — Process and Threads
 The process has a virtual memory address space, information
(such as a base priority), and an affinity for one or more
processors.
 Threads are the unit of execution scheduled by the kernel’s
dispatcher.
 Each thread has its own state, including a priority, processor
affinity, and accounting information.
 A thread can be one of six states: ready, standby, running,
waiting, transition, and terminated.

-- 24 of 49 --

21.25 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Kernel — Scheduling
 The dispatcher uses a 32-level priority scheme to determine
the order of thread execution.
 Priorities are divided into two classes
 The real-time class contains threads with priorities
ranging from 16 to 31
 The variable class contains threads having priorities
from 0 to 15
 Characteristics of Windows 7’s priority strategy
 Trends to give very good response times to interactive
threads that are using the mouse and windows
 Enables I/O-bound threads to keep the I/O devices busy
 Complete-bound threads soak up the spare CPU cycles
in the background

-- 25 of 49 --

21.26 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Kernel — Scheduling (Cont.)
 Scheduling can occur when a thread enters the ready or wait
state, when a thread terminates, or when an application
changes a thread’s priority or processor affinity
 Real-time threads are given preferential access to the CPU;
but 7 does not guarantee that a real-time thread will start to
execute within any particular time limit .
 This is known as soft realtime.

-- 26 of 49 --

21.27 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Kernel — Trap Handling
 The kernel provides trap handling when exceptions and
interrupts are generated by hardware of software.
 Exceptions that cannot be handled by the trap handler are
handled by the kernel's exception dispatcher.
 The interrupt dispatcher in the kernel handles interrupts by
calling either an interrupt service routine (such as in a device
driver) or an internal kernel routine.
 The kernel uses spin locks that reside in global memory to
achieve multiprocessor mutual exclusion.

-- 27 of 49 --

21.28 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Executive — Object Manager
 Windows 7 uses objects for all its services and entities; the
object manger supervises the use of all the objects
 Generates an object handle
 Checks security
 Keeps track of which processes are using each object
 Objects are manipulated by a standard set of methods, namely
create, open, close, delete, query name, parse
and security.

-- 28 of 49 --

21.29 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Executive — Naming Objects
 The Windows 7 executive allows almost any object to be given
a name, which may be either permanent or temporary.
Exceptions are process, thread and some others object types.
 Object names are structured like file path names in MS-DOS
and UNIX.
 Windows 7 implements a symbolic link object, which is similar
to symbolic links in UNIX that allow multiple nicknames or
aliases to refer to the same file.
 A process gets an object handle by creating an object by
opening an existing one, by receiving a duplicated handle from
another process, or by inheriting a handle from a parent
process.
 Each object is protected by an access control list.

-- 29 of 49 --

21.30 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Executive — Virtual Memory Manager
 The design of the VM manager assumes that the underlying
hardware supports virtual to physical mapping a paging
mechanism, transparent cache coherence on multiprocessor
systems, and virtual addressing aliasing.
 The VM manager in Windows 7 uses a page-based
management scheme with a page size of 4 KB.
 The Windows 7 VM manager uses a two step process to
allocate memory
 The first step reserves a portion of the process’s address
space
 The second step commits the allocation by assigning
space in the system’s paging file(s)

-- 30 of 49 --

21.31 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Virtual-Memory Layout

-- 31 of 49 --

21.32 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Virtual Memory Manager (Cont.)
 The virtual address translation in Windows 7 uses several data
structures
 Each process has a page directory that contains 1024 page
directory entries of size 4 bytes.
 Each page directory entry points to a page table which
contains 1024 page table entries (PTEs) of size 4 bytes.
 Each PTE points to a 4 KB page frame in physical memory.
 A 10-bit integer can represent all the values form 0 to 1023,
therefore, can select any entry in the page directory, or in a page
table.
 This property is used when translating a virtual address pointer
to a bye address in physical memory.
 A page can be in one of six states: valid, zeroed, free standby,
modified and bad.

-- 32 of 49 --

21.33 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Virtual-to-Physical Address Translation
 10 bits for page directory entry, 20 bits for page table entry, and
12 bits for byte offset in page

-- 33 of 49 --

21.34 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Page File Page-Table Entry
5 bits for page protection, 20 bits for page frame address, 4 bits to
select a paging file, and 3 bits that describe the page state. V = 0

-- 34 of 49 --

21.35 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Executive — I/O Manager
 The I/O manager is responsible for
 file systems
 cache management
 device drivers
 network drivers
 Keeps track of which installable file systems are loaded, and
manages buffers for I/O requests
 Works with VM Manager to provide memory-mapped file I/O
 Controls the Windows 7 cache manager, which handles
caching for the entire I/O system
 Supports both synchronous and asynchronous operations,
provides time outs for drivers, and has mechanisms for one
driver to call another

-- 35 of 49 --

21.36 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
File I/O

-- 36 of 49 --

21.37 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
File System
 The fundamental structure of the Windows 7 file system (NTFS)
is a volume
 Created by the Windows 7 disk administrator utility
 Based on a logical disk partition
 May occupy a portions of a disk, an entire disk, or span
across several disks
 All metadata, such as information about the volume, is stored in
a regular file
 NTFS uses clusters as the underlying unit of disk allocation
 A cluster is a number of disk sectors that is a power of two
 Because the cluster size is smaller than for the 16-bit FAT
file system, the amount of internal fragmentation is reduced

-- 37 of 49 --

21.38 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
File System — Internal Layout
 NTFS uses logical cluster numbers (LCNs) as disk addresses
 A file in NTFS is not a simple byte stream, as in MS-DOS or
UNIX, rather, it is a structured object consisting of attributes
 Every file in NTFS is described by one or more records in an
array stored in a special file called the Master File Table (MFT)
 Each file on an NTFS volume has a unique ID called a file
reference.
 64-bit quantity that consists of a 48-bit file number and a
16-bit sequence number
 Can be used to perform internal consistency checks
 The NTFS name space is organized by a hierarchy of
directories; the index root contains the top level of the B+ tree

-- 38 of 49 --

21.39 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
File System — Recovery
 All file system data structure updates are performed inside
transactions that are logged.
 Before a data structure is altered, the transaction writes a
log record that contains redo and undo information.
 After the data structure has been changed, a commit
record is written to the log to signify that the transaction
succeeded.
 After a crash, the file system data structures can be
restored to a consistent state by processing the log
records.

-- 39 of 49 --

21.40 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
File System — Recovery (Cont.)
 This scheme does not guarantee that all the user file data can
be recovered after a crash, just that the file system data
structures (the metadata files) are undamaged and reflect
some consistent state prior to the crash.
 The log is stored in the third metadata file at the beginning of
the volume.
 The logging functionality is provided by the Windows 7 log file
service.

-- 40 of 49 --

21.41 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Networking
 Windows 7 supports both peer-to-peer and client/server
networking; it also has facilities for network management.
 To describe networking in Windows 7, we refer to two of the
internal networking interfaces:
 NDIS (Network Device Interface Specification) — Separates
network adapters from the transport protocols so that either
can be changed without affecting the other.
 TDI (Transport Driver Interface) — Enables any session layer
component to use any available transport mechanism.
 Windows 7 implements transport protocols as drivers that can be
loaded and unloaded from the system dynamically.

-- 41 of 49 --

21.42 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Networking — Protocols
 The server message block (SMB) protocol is used to send I/O
requests over the network. It has four message types:
1. Session control
2. File
3. Printer
4. Message
 The network basic Input/Output system (NetBIOS) is a hardware
abstraction interface for networks
 Used to:
 Establish logical names on the network
 Establish logical connections of sessions between two
logical names on the network
 Support reliable data transfer for a session via NetBIOS
requests or SMBs

-- 42 of 49 --

21.43 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Networking — Protocols (Cont.)
 Windows 7 uses the TCP/IP Internet protocol version 4 and
version 6 to connect to a wide variety of operating systems
and hardware platforms.
 PPTP (Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol) is used to
communicate between Remote Access Server modules
running on Windows 7 machines that are connected over the
Internet.
 The Data Link Control protocol (DLC) is used to access IBM
mainframes and HP printers that are directly connected to the
network (possible on 32-bit only versions using unsigned
drivers).

-- 43 of 49 --

21.44 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Networking — Domains
 NT uses the concept of a domain to manage global access rights
within groups.
 A domain is a group of machines running NT server that share a
common security policy and user database.
 Windows 7 provides three models of setting up trust relationships
 One way, A trusts B
 Two way, transitive, A trusts B, B trusts C so A, B, C trust
each other
 Crosslink – allows authentication to bypass hierarchy to cut
down on authentication traffic.

-- 44 of 49 --

21.45 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Name Resolution in TCP/IP Networks
 On an IP network, name resolution is the process of converting
a computer name to an IP address
 e.g., www.bell-labs.com resolves to 135.104.1.14
 Windows 7 provides several methods of name resolution:
 Windows Internet Name Service (WINS)
 broadcast name resolution
 domain name system (DNS)
 a host file
 an LMHOSTS file

-- 45 of 49 --

21.46 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Name Resolution
 WINS consists of two or more WINS servers that maintain a
dynamic database of name to IP address bindings, and client
software to query the servers.
 WINS uses the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
(DHCP), which automatically updates address configurations
in the WINS database, without user or administrator
intervention.

-- 46 of 49 --

21.47 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Programmer Interface — Memory Management
 Virtual memory:
 VirtualAlloc reserves or commits virtual memory
 VirtualFree decommits or releases the memory
 These functions enable the application to determine the
virtual address at which the memory is allocated
 An application can use memory by memory mapping a file
into its address space
 Multistage process
 Two processes share memory by mapping the same file
into their virtual memory

-- 47 of 49 --

21.48 Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Memory Management (Cont.)
 A heap in the Win32 environment is a region of reserved
address space
 A Win 32 process is created with a 1 MB default heap
 Access is synchronized to protect the heap’s space
allocation data structures from damage by concurrent
updates by multiple threads
 Because functions that rely on global or static data typically fail
to work properly in a multithreaded environment, the thread-
local storage mechanism allocates global storage on a per-
thread basis
 The mechanism provides both dynamic and static methods
of creating thread-local storage

-- 48 of 49 --

Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne ©2018	Operating System Concepts – 10th Edition
Thank you

-- 49 of 49 --

